doc: add style guide for contributors (#6471)
ocaml/dune: doc/hacking.rst

Nix users may drop into a development shell with the necessary dependencies for
building docs ``nix develop .#doc``.

General Guidelines
==================

Dune has grown to be a fairly large project that over time has acquired its own
style. Below is an attempt to enumerate some important points of this style.
These rules aren't axioms and we may break them when justified. However, we
should have a good reason in mind when breaking them. Finally, the list isn't
exhaustive by any means and is subject to change. Feel free to discuss anything
in particular with the team.

- Parameter signatures should be self descriptive. Use labels when the types
  alone aren't sufficient to make the signature readable.

Bad:

.. code:: ocaml

   val display_name : string -> string -> _ Pp.t

Good:

.. code:: ocaml

   val display_name : first_name:string -> last_name:string -> _ Pp.t

- Avoid type aliases when possible. Yes, they might make some type signatures

>   more readable, but they make the code harder to grep and make merlin's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  more readable, but they make the code harder to grep and make Merlin's
```

  inferred types more confusing.

> - Every .ml file must have a corresponding .mli. The only exception to this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Every ``.ml`` file must have a corresponding ``.mli``. The only exception to this
```

>   rule is .ml files with only type definitions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  rule is ``.ml`` files with only type definitions.
```

>   rule is .ml files with only type definitions.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps we should encourage only `mli` files with a type definition instead? I guess marking them in the stanza can be a bit more annoying however.

Author: I don't like those because one cannot define exceptions to them. I suppose should add that to the list

> - Every module should have toplevel documentation that describes the module

Reviewer 2: By this you mean doc in the `mli`?

Author: Unless its .ml only

  briefly. This is a good place to discuss its purpose, invariants, etc.

> - Keep interfaces short & sweet. The less functions, types, etc there is, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Keep interfaces short & sweet. The less functions, types, etc. there are, the
```

  easier it is for users to understand, use, and ultimately modify the
  interface correctly. Instead of creating elaborate interfaces with the hope

>   of future proofing every use case, embrace change and make it easier to throw

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  of future-proofing every use case, embrace change and make it easier to throw
```

  out or replace the interface.

>   Ideally, the user of the interface should have one obvious way to use it. A

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Ideally, an interface user should have one obvious way to use it. A
```

  particularly annoying violator of this is the "logic-less chain of

>   functions". For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  functions." For example:
```

  apart, reading code requires scrolling and IDE tools to understand the code.

Bad:

.. code:: ocaml

   let dir = .. in
   (* 50 odd lines or so that don't use [dir] *)
   f dir

Good:

.. code:: ocaml

  let dir = .. in
  f dir

- A corollary to the previous guideline: keep the scope of bindings as small as
  possible.

Bad:

.. code:: ocaml

   let x1 = f foo in let x2 = f bar in
   let y1 = g foo in let y2 = g bar in
   let dx = x2 -. x1 in
   let dy = y2 -. y1 in
   dx^2 +. dy^2

Good:

.. code:: ocaml

   let dx =
     let x1 = f foo in let x2 = f bar in
     x2 -. x1
   in
   let dy =
     let y1 = g foo in let y2 = g bar in
     y2 -. y1
   in
   dx^2 +. dy^2

- Prefer ``Code_error.raise`` instead of ``assert false``. The reader often has
  no idea what invariant is broken by the ``assert false``. Kindly describe it
  to the reader in the error message.

- Avoid meangingless names like `x`, `a`, `b`, `f`. Try to find a more
  descriptive name or just inline it altogether.

- If a module ``Foo`` has a module type ``Foo.S`` and you'd like to avoid
  repeating its definition in the implementation and the signature, introduce

>   an .ml only module ``Foo_intf`` and write the ``S`` only once in there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  an ``.ml``-only module ``Foo_intf`` and write the ``S`` only once in there.
```

- Instead of introducing a type ``foo``, consider introducing a module ``Foo``
  with a type ``t``. This is often a place to put functions related to ``foo``.

Subjective Style Points
-----------------------

There's some stylistic decisions we made that don't have logical justification
and are basically a matter of taste. Nevertheless, it's useful to follow them
to keep the code consistent.

- Match patterns should be sorted by the length of their RHS when possible.
  Keep the shorter clauses near the top.

- If a module ``Foo`` defines a type ``t``, all functions that take ``t`` in
  this module should have ``t`` as their first argument. This is the "t comes
  first" rule.

- Do not write inverted if-else expressions. 

Bad:

.. code:: ocaml

   (* try reading this out loud without short circuiting your brain *)
   if not x then foo else bar

Good:

.. code:: ocaml

>    if x then bar else foo

Reviewer 3: I'd add something about `match x with false -> foo | true -> bar`. This is an idiom I've seen in dune more than in other codebases.

Reviewer 2: This also ties in with the point above about keeping the shorter clauses at the top. Sometimes the false case is trivial and it doesn't help to keep it at the bottom.

Reviewer 4: Agreed, I actually tend to use `match` for `bool`s a lot because I think the resulting code is often easier to read (not always, but maybe in 50% of cases?), particularly because I'm free to reorder the branches.

- We prefer snake_casing identifiers. This includes the names of modules and
  module types.

> - Avoid qualifying constructors, record fields. Instead, add type annotations to the

Reviewer: Should this be: Avoid qualifying constructors and record fields. ??

>   type being matched on or being constructed. E.g.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  type being matched on or being constructed. E.g.,
```

Bad:

.. code:: ocaml

   let foo = Command.Args.S []

Good:

.. code:: ocaml

>    let (foo : _ Command.Args.t) = S []

Reviewer 3: I'd add something about avoiding optional arguments. It's another good rule we already apply.

   let dx = x2 -. x1 in
   let dy = y2 -. y1 in
   dx^2 +. dy^2

Good:

.. code:: ocaml

   let dx =
     let x1 = f foo in let x2 = f bar in
     x2 -. x1
   in
   let dy =
     let y1 = g foo in let y2 = g bar in
     y2 -. y1
   in
   dx^2 +. dy^2

- Prefer ``Code_error.raise`` instead of ``assert false``. The reader often has
  no idea what invariant is broken by the ``assert false``. Kindly describe it
  to the reader in the error message.

- Avoid meangingless names like `x`, `a`, `b`, `f`. Try to find a more
  descriptive name or just inline it altogether.

- If a module ``Foo`` has a module type ``Foo.S`` and you'd like to avoid
  repeating its definition in the implementation and the signature, introduce
  an ``.ml``-only module ``Foo_intf`` and write the ``S`` only once in there.

- Instead of introducing a type ``foo``, consider introducing a module ``Foo``
  with a type ``t``. This is often the place to put functions related to
  ``foo``.

- Avoid optional arguments. They increase brevity at the expense of readability
  and are annoying to grep. Further more, they encourage callers not to think
  at all about these optional arguments even if they often should.

> - Stage functions explicitly with the ``Stage`` module.

Reviewer 4: Do we actually use this idiom? I don't remember seeing it. I kind of mostly dislike it, particularly because people tend to be pretty random/unprintipled about where it's used.

Author: We do use it and not using it has caused some serious performance regressions in the past. I'm pretty sure we also inherited it from janestreet https://blog.janestreet.com/making-staging-explicit/
